
# Introduction
The question of what makes one product more successful than another has for a long time been a source of intrigue and contention for artists, sociologists, computer scientists, network scientists, and psychologists alike. When we consider the most successful books, movies, songs, and pieces of art, we often fail to pinpoint the reasons behind their extreme success. Why has Michael Jackson's "Thriller" topped many charts across the world? Why is the Harry Potter series a best seller? Is it because they are qualitatively better than other songs or books? While many might be tempted to make that assumption, it is difficult to support, since many best sellers, such as the Harry Potter series, were rejected by many publishers and experts before becoming successful. Many experts also acknowledge this possibility of success being impossible to predict. For example, the novelist, playwright, and screenwriter William Goldman describes this when saying, “Nobody knows anything...... Not one person in the entire motion picture field knows for a certainty what's going to work. Every time out it's a guess and, if you're lucky, an educated one.”

The question of inequality and unpredictability of success within cultural markets (songs, movies, books, etc...) has led to two explanations from the perspectives of sociology and network science. The first is the "common sense" explanation, which suggests that people understand their interests well and that the success of a product is merely an outcome of its quality, which would imply that success ought to be predictable. The second explanation deals with social influence and suggests that individuals are unsure of their interests and rather rely on social learning and observations of the choices of others, leading to conformity in decisions and exacerbating the inequality in success amongst different products. This theory sugggests that success is unpredictable based on the features of the product itself and is rather the outcome of cumulative advantage (also known as the Matthew Effect), whereby a slight advantage for a product compounds over time and leads to extreme success relative to other products that might have similar features. For example, if a few people randomly select one product over another, this would lead to cumulative advantage and cause this product to be more successful in the long run, although it might not be inherently different from another less successful product.

In this project, we wanted to explore these ideas particularly in the context of the music industry through Spotify data on 51k+ tracks between 2014 and 2020, joined with another dataset on Spotify Charts during that period, with the goal of trying to predict whether or not a song makes it into the charts (an indication of high success) by classifying it based on their audio features and artist metrics. The final dataset will include audio features and artist metrics. We will develop machine learning models trained on the attributes of the different songs and artists in an attempt to predict the chances of the song making it into the charts. We specifically chose to focus on the music industry since we all have a shared interest in music and spend a great deal of time listening to songs on Spotify, and we were interested in testing the extent to which the success of the songs we listen to and the recommendations we receive through charts are predictable.
